Good afternoon.
My name is James Dempsey.
I'm an engineer on the
Cocoa Frameworks team,
and this is Session 127,
Design Patterns to
Simplify Mac Accessibility.
This session primarily are just
a handful of things to keep
in mind while you're building,
especially custom views,
that make it much,
much easier for you to add
the accessibility support
later or after the fact.
Now, we're also going to talk
about just a few other things.
We're going to do a brief Lion update.
And before we even jump
into the Lion update,
I just wanted to take a few
minutes to talk about really,
at a very high level,
why we have this session,
why we're all in this room today.
So at Apple,
we really strive to provide an
excellent user experience to everyone.
Sure.
[Transcript missing]
Now in 2011,
a visually impaired user can walk up
to any Mac that has shipped in the
last six years and turn on VoiceOver.
And that can be their Mac,
or the Mac of their
friend or their relative,
or at a lab at school,
or at any mall that has an Apple store.
Walk up to any computer and just use it.
And it's that kind of amazing
leap in usability that's really
why we're all in this room today.
Now, Job 1 is always providing
everyone a great user experience,
but making an application accessible
does have additional benefits.
It's a programmatic
interface to your app's UI.
So it also lends itself very well to
automated user interface scripting,
which is great for internal testing,
automated UI testing.
Power users love it.
And our own development
tools take advantage of this
to record and play back.
actions in the UI for doing
things like profiling.
And then finally,
Section 508 requires that apps
that are sold into government and
education accounts are accessible.
But despite all the benefits, again,
we want to provide everyone
a great user experience.
So, talked a little bit about VoiceOver.
Why do we have a session at WWDC?
Well, VoiceOver doesn't work alone.
It needs a partner.
In order for it to describe what's
going on in your application,
it uses accessibility client APIs to
make requests of your application,
and your application needs to
respond with the correct information,
the appropriate
accessibility information.
However,
we don't put the entire burden on you.
In fact,
we provide both app kits and tools to do
a lot of the heavy lifting and doing a
lot of the accessibility work for you.
So before we jump into your application,
let's take a look at those framework
and tools and what's changed in Lion.
So in Lion, we've had a great number
of new user features.
We've had a great number of
new app kit enhancements.
And as we've worked on Lion,
we've really,
really strived to provide as much
accessibility support out of the box.
And so what you'll find in Lion is that
the new user features are accessible.
[Transcript missing]
So let's just talk about
some of these inversions.
It's your document surrounded
by all the versions in space.
Just as always,
you make your document accessible.
We've handled all the rest of
the chrome around the edges.
We have new features for
auto-correct pop-ups,
little lookup pop-ups.
These are all automatically accessible,
so just continue using your
standard text views or web views,
and VoiceOver loves these guys.
Full screen, again,
you make your content accessible,
and we handle the rest.
If you play with full
screen in your seed,
there's still a few things we need
to hook up before we finish up.
In the end, the message is the same.
You do your content, we handle the rest.
Sandboxing.
Has anybody gone to the sandboxing talk?
What are the accessibility
implications of sandboxing?
Well, one of the things that happens when
your app is sandboxed is when you
bring up an open and save panel,
to a user, it looks like there's a new
-- there's a save sheet on a
document in your application.
But, of course, behind the scenes,
one application, the one in the sandbox,
has its document window,
but that sheet is handled by a completely
separate privileged process that's
able to access all of the file system.
And yet we want to provide to
accessibility clients the same
seamless appearance that this
is all happening in one app.
And, in fact, in Lion,
if -- in this case,
we're going to have a single application,
and in this case,
I went and looked at text edits,
accessibility hierarchy,
it is all properly stitched together.
It handles accessory views correctly.
So all of that works without, again,
any additional work on your part.
Overlay scrollers.
For accessibility clients,
they'll still see that
there are scrollers there,
but they'll be able to find out
whether they're hidden or not,
and also be able to flash the
scrollers as if the user had scrolled.
Popovers.
NSPopover is fully accessible.
If you are using your own
kind of popover-ish mechanism,
highly recommend moving
over to NSPopover.
VoiceOver loves it, loves them.
View-based table views.
So it's always been difficult
to have complex table cells.
You'd have to make your
own NSCell subclass,
and then the accessibility of such
a thing was also very difficult,
and in some cases, I think impossible.
View-based TableView takes that
and completely revolutionizes it
from an accessibility perspective.
You build a view-based cell,
and because it's view-based,
we just take advantage of all
of the existing accessibility
for standard controls,
and we provide a much,
much richer table view experience
with view-based table views.
A few accessibility notes.
When you have a table cell view,
you want to hook up the text field
outlet to the primary text field.
VoiceOver will automatically use that
text field to find out which piece of
text is the most important to be spoken.
Similarly,
rather than just reloading data,
using the new row insert move and remove
methods where appropriate is very useful.
It allows apps like VoiceOver to
track the rows as they move around.
It's also more efficient.
We've also added identifiers.
It's a new protocol with
two fairly simple methods.
This protocol is used by table views,
view-based table views,
for keeping track of which rows and
which cells map with which columns.
It's also used by AppKit's
persistence mechanism for recording
pieces of state that need to
be reinstated when we resume.
But we also use this identifier
through accessibility.
So accessibility clients are able to read
that identifier and have a persistent
way of identifying pieces of your
UI between launches of your application.
This is particularly handy for
folks doing automated UI testing,
since you can set the identifier
and then use it immediately
in your testing scripts.
In addition to all the work we've done to
support the various new features in Lion,
we've also done a new version
of an accessibility inspector.
The interface looks refreshed,
redesigned.
We've kept all the
existing functionality,
but added some new features,
especially navigation features.
And I'd like to show
that to you right now.
This is Accessibility Inspector.
And what Accessibility Inspector does
is it uses the same accessibility
client APIs that VoiceOver uses,
but it gives us a much more detailed
look at exactly what each UI element on
the screen is reporting to VoiceOver.
So for instance, so let's navigate to it.
You can find it in your Developer Tools,
Applications, Utilities,
Accessibility Tools,
Accessibility Inspector.
There we go.
And what Accessibility
Inspector will do is,
as I point to items,
it will give me information about
whatever is under the menu item,
or the item under the mouse.
So if I take a look, say,
here in the Finder,
here is a menu button.
If I point to it,
I can also lock onto that item
using a keyboard shortcut,
Command-F7.
And when I lock onto that item,
I can inspect it a little bit further.
First, I can turn on a highlight so
I can see which item it is.
I can look at its place in
the accessibility hierarchy.
It's a menu button in a group in a
toolbar in the window in the application.
But new, it's easier to move around.
If I want to move to that toolbar,
I can just either go to
Element or double-click.
We also remember where you've been so
I can navigate back down the hierarchy.
The navigation can be done either through
these navigation buttons or through
command control and the arrow keys,
which is a very handy way to
navigate through without using
the mouse or perhaps disturbing
your key state or what have you.
Once I'm focused on an item,
I can also perform actions
such as popping up the menu.
If you're new to accessibility,
Accessibility Inspector is a great way
to find out the sorts of information,
one, that your application is already
providing to accessibility,
and also the sorts of things
that accessibility needs.
Let's do one other thing, which is,
let's inspect the window
navigating up to it.
And let's change the size.
For any attribute that is writable,
I can change, for instance, the height,
set the value, and it updates.
So that's a look at the new
Accessibility Inspector.
So reviewing Lion technologies, again,
user features and framework features,
we've done a lot of work to make
those items accessible without
additional work for the developer,
for you.
We have a new accessibility inspector,
and then I'd encourage you to check
the AppKit release notes for more
details about the items I've talked
about and some other smaller things.
Let's talk about design patterns
to simplify Mac accessibility.
And kind of the idea of this talk is
if you've ever had the experience where
maybe you're at the grocery store and you
get home and your significant other says,
oh,
if I knew you were going to the store,
I would have had you pick this up.
And if you had that additional
requirement in mind when
you were at the store,
it would have been much, much easier,
saved yourself a trip.
You could have incorporated that
requirement with very little effort
on your part if you had just known.
What we're going to do is talk
about a few of those things
in terms of writing views.
So we're going to talk just a
bit about implied versus explicit
information in your custom classes.
We'll walk through a couple
of kind of general approaches
for building a custom view.
Then we're going to see that
the accessibility client,
what it's expecting,
drives the requirements,
and those requirements drive a
really short list of things we
should consider as we decide on
approaches for building a custom view.
So all of the information, 80, 90,
100% of the information
that accessibility needs,
that we saw in Accessibility Inspector,
for instance,
is already in a view that you've written.
It's just sometimes that
information is very implicit as
opposed to explicitly spelled out.
Even what we see up here is a
relatively simple user interface.
It's a window with a button in it.
If we focus in just on that
button and think about all the
information being conveyed,
Well, first we know it's a button,
first of all.
We know it's containment.
It has a parent.
We can see what window it's in.
All of that's conveyed very implicitly.
We know it's enabled.
We know it doesn't have keyboard focus.
We know what its title is.
We know where it is on the screen.
And since it's a button,
we also know we can press it.
Now there's a myriad of ways that you
could get that particular image to
show up on a screen or in your view.
Accessibility needs to have explicit
and structured information provided
because it's a programmatic interface.
And so choices you make in building your
view greatly affect how easy or difficult
it may be to provide that information.
So we're going to start with
a really just dirt simple,
but ugly, custom view.
It's a white box with two
colored squares in it.
And how does it work?
What's the interface?
Well, if I click, it selects one.
If I click the other,
it selects the other and
deselects the first one.
It also supports full
keyboard navigation,
so you can see the focus ring
is entered and is on that
red square and hit tab again,
and now it's on the green square.
Very simple view.
But even with such a simple view,
there's like a gazillion ways
you could write this view.
We're going to take a look at a few
approaches and then see what their
accessibility implications are.
So in approach one,
it seems straightforward and simple.
View handles everything.
I have one class, simple view.
In drawRect,
I just draw a background square,
and I draw two squares,
and I'm done with drawing.
Event handling,
I figure out which square was hit.
It seems very straightforward.
It also seems like we've implied
a lot of information in there.
We don't know anything about those
rectangles and only DrawRect really knows
what's going on about those squares.
Approach 2,
we might add a little substructure.
So maybe we have our simple view class,
we have some color swatch classes.
They each know their bounds,
they know how to draw themselves,
they can hit test themselves.
In approach three, though, we might say,
do we need a custom view at all?
What if we composed three custom views?
Well, in this case,
we actually pick up a lot
of functionality for free.
We don't have to write the
hit testing because the view
hierarchy already hit tests.
We don't need custom code for
handling keyboard focus because the
first responder already does that,
but only to the view level.
And we also get a lot of
basic accessibility support.
So when we're thinking
about a custom view,
one thought is,
could I just compose views?
Would that be OK?
Would that work?
Would that make my life easier and
make my code more maintainable?
But then the fourth approach is,
isn't this really just
a segmented control?
I can click either one.
One is selected at a time.
I can tab in and select each item.
Why am I reinventing a whole new
view when there's a perfectly
good framework class I could use?
And so, anytime you're like,
I need a custom view, stop for a moment,
take a breath.
Check the headers.
See if anything's new in 10.7.
Maybe I don't need a custom view.
Because if you don't,
By far the easiest path to an accessible
user interface is reusing the work
somebody else has already done.
Now, of these approaches,
we're going to focus
on two for this talk.
Using framework classes,
there's not a lot to say there
in terms of making it accessible.
It already is accessible,
so we'll drop that out.
Composing three custom views
is really just a very specific
subversion of approach two.
So we're going to focus on the
view handling everything or
objects used for substructure.
Now that we have talked a
little bit about two basic
ways of putting views together,
Now let's see what an accessibility
client needs and how that drives
our requirements of what we're going
to need to do to these two views.
So an app bends a
hierarchy of UI elements.
In each node in the tree, your app,
the window, the button,
is represented by a lightweight node
in this hierarchy vended to clients.
And each of those nodes supports actions,
as we saw in Accessibility Inspector,
a list of attributes.
We also support notifications to find
out things when windows come and go,
for instance.
And behind every one of those UI element
nodes is some object in your application,
and it implements the
NSAccessibility protocol.
We're going to take just a
brief look at this protocol.
Essentially, a client wants to know what
attributes do you support.
Accessibility attribute names gets called
on your object and returns the value.
Essentially,
this is the set of methods that
provides the response for the request
that an accessibility client has made.
Here are some that deal with attributes.
We also have that deal with actions,
hit testing, finding the focused element,
pruning the tree of extraneous items,
and posting notifications.
Now how do clients get at this tree?
Well,
they can start from the top of the tree,
and then using the axchildren attribute,
navigate their way down.
So based on what the client needs,
things to keep in mind.
One is, if we have an element in
the accessibility tree,
it needs some object in your
app to implement NSAccessibility
and respond to those methods.
The other thing that's important
is every element needs to
know its children in the tree.
So how does this translate
to our approaches?
Well, when the view handles everything,
we certainly do see there's a
view and there's two things in it.
We should report those things as
unique visual elements in the tree,
but we only have one object per instance.
So in this case,
we need to create objects specifically
to report the accessibility information.
We often call them faux UI elements.
In Approach 2,
we already have the structure in place.
The simple view has two
color swatches as children.
So we already have objects in our
original design that we can hang
these accessibility methods off of.
So the design choices.
In approach one, we need to come up with
[Transcript missing]
is relying a lot on their parent because
the parent is where the smarts are.
They have a pointer back to their
parent and they ask their parent,
"What's my bounds because
I don't know myself?"
More typically,
that sub-element is a little smarter.
It handles its own accessibility,
and it's a great place to put that logic.
Now,
in addition from this top-down approach,
clients can also access by hit testing.
And in this case,
as we saw in Accessibility Inspector,
let's say we hit test that point.
It hit tests down to the button cell,
and so we return the corresponding
UI element to the client.
And from there, the tree can be navigated
asking for the AX parent.
Which adds a few more
requirements to our list.
Oh,
one other thing that the client can do,
and often does do,
is ask for the size and position.
That's how we were able
to draw the highlight.
That's how VoiceOver draws its cursor.
We need to provide screen coordinates.
So, in addition to children,
every element needs to know its parent,
and every element needs to
know its bounds on the screen,
which brings up a few requirements.
Now at this point,
the two approaches merge a little bit.
The view handles everything.
The foe UI element needs
to know who its parent is.
Needs to know for two reasons.
One, it needs to report a parent,
but also potentially it
needs to ask its parent,
since the parent is a view,
to translate its coordinates from view
coordinates to screen coordinates.
We end up with the same
requirement for approach two.
That sub-element,
whether it's a faux one or one
that's built into the structure,
needs to know the parent.
So geometry design choices.
In approach one,
you will probably want to factor all
of your geometry of your sub-elements
into some method where you hand
in some identifier for the element
and get back the correct rectangle.
In Approach 2,
the sub-elements likely have their
own bounds that they carry with them.
But whichever way you go with,
the same mechanism can
be used for view drawing,
hit testing, accessibility reporting,
and accessibility hit testing.
So one factored method
handles both cases,
or both sets of cases,
your standard drawing and event
handling and your accessibility case.
One requirement that people
don't often think of,
or sometimes miss when
building a custom view,
is that those sub-elements do
need a reference up the hierarchy.
This is true regardless of approach,
and it's something to keep in mind.
You need the parent because
you need to report it.
But again, we report in screen
coordinates to accessibility.
We hit test in screen coordinates.
So even if you are in a hierarchy
and you're two or three sub elements
down from the containing view,
you need either a direct or some
indirect way of having your view
translate the coordinates for you.
The next thing a client requires,
they really rely on keyboard focus.
VoiceOver users tend not to use a mouse,
sometimes use a trackpad,
but very much navigate
using the keyboard.
and Full Keyboard Navigation.
So finding out,
first asking the application
which element has the focus,
but also registering for notifications
so that when the focus changes,
a notification is sent to the
client that focus has changed.
So that adds one more item to our list,
our relatively short list
of things to keep in mind.
Now, when there's a change in focus,
again, if you're dealing with views,
the first responder
handles that automatically.
If you have your own custom view,
you're handling focus changes yourself.
Just as you need to handle the
focus ring changes in tracking
what subelement has focus,
you need to also do the appropriate
accessibility notification and reporting.
It's best to have a single point of
control where focus change happens.
I've seen it scattered to the four
winds in some pieces of code I've
looked at over the years where
it's just you jam something into an
IVAR and there's no control point.
That control point is really useful
to have both for accessibility
purposes but just for general
maintaining your code purposes.
And the final thing to keep in mind is
that clients can interact with your app.
They can perform actions
In comes an action, presses that button.
They can also set attribute values as
we saw in the demo where accessibility
inspector changed the size of a window.
Now, it's important to keep in mind that
not all interaction with your view
has an NS event attached to it.
I've definitely seen code over the
years where it's relying on just the
current location of the current event.
Well, there might not be a
mouse involved at all.
It's typically best to factor
things like triggering behaviors,
changing the selection into general
methods that possibly if you're
changing selection by index.
And then call those general methods from
both the event handling methods that
you write and also from accessibility
actions and attribute setters.
One, it centralizes your code
and makes your life easier.
But the second thing it does
is it ensures that when a
VoiceOver user presses that button,
that it's going through the same
code path as when a user clicks on
the button in the user interface.
So let's just do a brief review.
We didn't talk about
it except for briefly,
but again, I stress, when possible,
use standard controls and views.
And there's a handful,
five things to keep in mind when
you're building custom views.
You need a backing object.
So if you're on the fence about just
having a Mondo view do everything itself,
or having some substructure,
making it accessible maybe
will make you lean more towards
using some substructure.
You need to know the child
and parent and rectangle.
Having that back pointer to the parent
and potentially to the containing view is
something that often you're not thinking
about when you write a view at the start.
That's a good one to keep in mind.
bottlenecking or putting a control
point for your keyboard focus,
and also making your interaction
not rely on NS events.
Keeping those in mind as you write
views will really make it much,
much easier to
Come in later, because we know when you
sit down and write a view,
you can only focus on
so many things at once,
and you're trying to get it to
draw right and handle events right.
Follow these steps,
keep these few things in mind,
and then as you add accessibility later,
you'll find most of the
work's already been done.
So I want to point you to some resources.
We have three sets or three
pieces of sample code.
Image Map really details how
you would work with case one.
Dicey is approach two.
Sketch Plus Accessibility
shows how you would implement
accessibility into a larger,
more complex app.
So I highly recommend taking a look
at those pieces of sample code.
I also wanted to point you to
the relatively new accessibility
roles and attributes reference.
It's, as far as I know,
the most up to date we've ever
had in terms of mapping which
roles go with which attributes
and defining them very well.
So I would love you to
take a look at those.
And then finally,
the accessibility programming
guidelines for Cocoa.
For more information,
The related sessions are in the past,
but feel free to check
out what's new in Cocoa.
And also,
we talked a little about table views.
And finally, if you would be willing,
I'd like to do a little song.
I've been working on accessibility
for about five years now,
so it's about time to do a song about it.
Um, plain and simple.
I'd like to, before we start,
introduce the breakpoints.
On guitar is Darren Minifee.
He's an engineer on the VoiceOver team,
accessibility team.
And on keyboard is Victor Alexander.
Who as you might know is the best
slide advanced man in the business.
And we're going to try
something a little new today.
We'll have a little instrument break
with an iPad somewhere in there.
So watch out.
Thanks.
Excellent.
Are we in tune?
I think so.
Cool.
All right.
And with that, the accessibility song.
♪ Application is a tiny little server ♪
♪ Of information of its user interface
♪ ♪ It dishes out the dirt with such
a quiet fervor ♪ ♪ You might not even
realize it's taking place ♪ ♪ The client
gets a lightweight representation ♪ ♪
Of your app's UI elementary ♪ ♪ Then it's
just elementary my dear Watson ♪ ♪
Your app's an open book no more mystery ♪
♪ Think how much use for bitmaps on
screens ♪ ♪ They get the lay of the land
through this alternate means ♪ ♪ If you
wanna build an app with maximum utility
♪ ♪ Then take a little time and implement
accessibility ♪ ♪ Tell the story of your
application ♪ ♪ Describe the glory of its
interface ♪ ♪ So we can see sight unseen
what's going on on the screen ♪ ♪ Yeah,
build your app for the whole human race ♪
♪ There's an object behind each
UI element ♪ ♪ Accessibility methods
compute ♪ ♪ The response to each
request that the client sent ♪
♪ For any action or attribute ♪
♪ The client wants to be notified when
things are happening blow by blow ♪
♪ Like when key focus changes where
it resides or windows come and go ♪
♪ For standard controls this is built
right in ♪ ♪ For a view of your own we
need your help for the win ♪ ♪ This isn't
rocket science in some government
facilities ♪ ♪ So take a little time and
implement accessibility ♪ ♪ And tell the
story of your application ♪ ♪ Mind the
query of its interface ♪ ♪ So we can
easy as pie for you to automate your UI ♪
♪ Show your app to the whole human race ♪
♪ A thousand words they say ♪ ♪ I don't
believe this ratio anymore ♪ ♪ 'Cause
just a word or two goes such a long,
long way ♪ ♪ To describe what
an icon is for ♪ ♪ You can add
descriptions to match your style
♪ ♪ You can put 'em right in IB ♪
♪ You can add 'em to an image
description file ♪ ♪ Or do it
programmatically ♪ Let's just go back.
♪ So the way we get things done
♪ ♪ Accessible apps really are
more fun ♪ ♪ It's been rumored to
augment virility ♪ ♪ So come on
everyone implement accessibility ♪
♪ Describe the glory of its interface
♪ ♪ So we can know right away the
things we ought to say ♪ ♪ And share
your app with the whole human race ♪